2017: State of Operation Code and Year in Review

In August 2014, three-years ago this year we ran the `rails new operationcode` command in our terminal and launched Operation Code using the popular web framework Ruby on Rails to petition Congress to expand the New GI Bill to include code schools, or vocational programs for aspiring software developers. When we launched there were absolutely zero code schools that accepted the New GI Bill, no global military community to support each other learn to code, no military veterans scholarships for tech conferences or a software mentorship program for those that have worn the uniform and their families. This State of Operation Code and Year in Review is our report to you—our supporters—that goes into detail our strategic, operational and tactical efforts.
The year 2017 was one of incredible growth and dynamic change at Operation Code at every level of the organization, from the leadership staff to the board of directors, membership growth to legislation achievements. All in an effort to improve the lives of the men and women  who’ve served in uniform to ensure that every military service member, veteran and their families lead in the 21st century new skills economy.
At the heart we continue to be a decentralized and remote organization with the Slack app serving as our central nerve center, our water cooler, and where everything flows to and from, where we update each other on our status, what we still need help with, and what’s next. That being said, let’s roll right into our year in review. 
Membership 
Right around this time last year, we numbered 642 members, 52 software mentors, and 29 support staff. In that time, we’ve grown 419% to 2,686 members, 153 software mentors, and doubled our staff to 64. Our latest members, include a Milwaukie-based .NET and JavaScript coding bootcamp in the midwest, an Army veteran seeking a mentor in Ruby on Rails, and two military spouses, one based in Indiana studying computer science at her community college, and the other from Florida with experience in startups, fundraising and branding who joined the leadership team. Her husband is a Lt. Commander serving in our United States Navy. Hooyah. 
In recent months, our members have sent, on average between 8,000 and 11,000 messages weekly through Slack, and prevented over 1,000 emails from ever being sent. This incredible peer-to-peer military veterans community networks allows the board and leadership team at all levels to get more done. 
As Bill Brubaker (@noncreature0714) put it this month: 
“Hey all, just wanted to express my appreciation to the Operation Code community. For those who maybe just joined, and those who don’t know me; I joined maybe a year and a half ago, and though my participation has waxed and wane, the connections and encouragement I found here have been invaluable. There’s a lot of different opinions and a range of well researched advice from different viewpoints. These guided me to an awesome internship at Mitratech, a software company in Austin, TX, which led me to my first job as a Software Engineer at Darkblade working remotely — all through fellow veterans and concerned citizens. It’s taken me almost six years of learning and working with code and systems to get to this point. It’s difficult. So stick it out! If you are interested and passionate about being a developer/SE, but haven’t quite managed to get comfortable, it just means you haven’t yet found your niche. Be patient and engage in the community of mentors and members found here at Operation Code. Ask questions, give answers, debate. I know things don’t alway pan out the way I’d like, but by persistently being involved, even if infrequently, all that stuff irons out.”
We couldn’t have put it any better than Bill. Bottomline, we continue to rapidly grow, across 19 time zones globally, and in many ways outstripping our ability to keep up. Some members join in the middle of the night during Pacific Standard Time, but as always these are all good problems to have. 
 
Shipping
This year our first CTO and Marine veteran, Rick Rein led the charge and helped migrate operationcode.org from it’s previous Ruby on Rails application towards a new shiny application integrating React for the frontend, and Rails for the backend. You might know React from Facebook, where it’s leveraged in their messenger app. As you might imagine, behind the scenes, our frontend and backend teams worked tirelessly contributing tens of hundreds of hours—it also provided our members interested in the popular React framework to dive in, break things, get them back online and improve as software developers. We know from first-hand experience the fastest way to becoming a software developer is to dive right in and get coding. Thus, Operation Code is completely open source in that we permit all contributions or pull requests as is known in the community from across the United States and across the globe. 
To that end, our frontend team comprised of 86 contributors had six top major contributors this year, including: Kyle Holmberg, Evan Cooper, Alex Spence, Seth Bergman, Kelly McCleod, and John Hampton. Our backend team comprised of 33 contributors with four top contributors, including: Harry Levin, Loi Tran, Chris Mar, and Colleen Schnetter. We are forever grateful for the dedication and commitment of these 119 individuals to our mission. Each has ensured operationcode.org remains updated and a training ground for active military, transitioning service members, veterans, military spouses and those interested in software development to contribute and get coding. 
Speaking of shipping, mid-year Rick Rein had to step back from his volunteer duties as CTO. Rick was amazing in every way. Patient. Caring. Thoughtful and meticulous. He made magic happen and in many ways invented it. While we were all bummed to see Rick take a step back, our frontend and backend teams kept things in motion and sometimes things broke and both our issues (tickets) and pull requests piled up. Our milestones stalled. Last month, we were excited when mentor & contributor, an Air Force brat, and software developer Nell Shamrell expressed interest. Excited doesn’t describe the exact feeling. She previously helped over a dozen veterans get coding using exercism.io with incredible results for everyone participating. Don’t know exercisim.io? It’s crowd-sourced mentorship created by Ruby Hero Award Winner and GitHubber, Katrina Owen. So when Nell took the mantle by cleaning up issues, creating an Office of the CTO public Trello board, and announcing on Twitter we all breathed a sigh of relief. 
We are all incredibly psyched as we go into 2018 that Nell will lead our engineering team to great heights and get more veterans and spouses coding as a result. 
In the area of heights, our GitHub has been busy. Last year our core and contributing team maintained 23 repositories—today, we’re up to 47 with our frontend, backend, and our welcome bot leading the pack. Speaking of bots, these applications built in Python allow us to automate some features of the on-boarding process, including welcomes, and private messages. Huge thanks to William Montgomery and Allen Anthes for taking our welcome bots back online and creating a seamless solution going forward. 

While we explored usage of our community forum (leveraging Discourse) it didn’t take off as anticipated and was further made difficult to update—in a way that’s seamless on GiHub. We expect to fold this forum and integrate all documents, best practices and lessons learned in an open source environment moving forward to better serve our community in Slack. 

Through our actions, we’ll continue to inspire that great joy amongst veterans in building web apps and shipping something onto the web. That euphoric feeling that comes from it and craves to do it again the very next day. 

Fundraising & Finances
In our previous State of Operation Code we reported weak fundraising mechanisms that would enable us to scale. If 2017 is any indication, we are well on our way to ending this problem. In fact, we were successful in raising more dollars than previously imagined— this was in large part due to three major events: a federal contract award, first time corporate donations, and benefit dinner/ auction. Combined, we brought in over $50,000 in revenue that we will use to continue to build out our infrastructure, systems, processes, staffing levels, a scholarship endowment and thus a stronger foundation in 2018. Let’s break this down. 

On the federal contract, we will be providing marketing support to a major federal contractor in the crowd-sourcing arena by providing our members a seamless channel to contribute their newfound software expertise to the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs digital memorialization project. The project will enable members to win prize money for their successful contributions, demonstrate their resume to key leaders in the federal space, all while providing Operation Code revenue to sustain and grow. 

On the corporate and individual giving side, we were fortunate to have many returning companies and individuals give to sustain their giving from 2016 into 2017, and actually give more. We were grateful for the generosity of Liliana Aide Monge and Sabio, a Southern California coding bootcamp who led the individual pack. Liliana would time and time again motivate encourage us in our Slack #general channel matching dollar for dollar for Operation Code. These competitive fundraising sprints were incredibly helpful and encouraged many to give. 

The companies that gave for the first time and a close second included, Oracle, O’Reilly Media, Docker, and Puppet. All resources that we poured right into our membership and equipping our team with the resources that got us to the next month and into the next quarter. 

On the benefit dinner/ auction, we held our first evening fundraiser at Portland’s historic Sentinel Hotel in their Governor Ballroom raising over $18,000 in a one-night event that took months in the planning (we booked the room in April), thousands of man hours, several co-chairs (including a software developer from Colorado, eBay and myself), several dozen meetings, an event planner, an auctioneer, hundreds of envelopes and postage stamps, dozens of volunteers, thousands of emails, and last-minute impromptu execution. The end-result? A signature event worth doing again, and again, joined by Node.JS creator Dan Shaw, and several coding bootcamps including, David Wayne (Sabio), Ajay Menendez & Pattie Kettle (SecureSet), Mitch Robertson (Code Fellows), Summer (PDX Code Guild)


Vietnam Navy veteran Jose Hernandez led us in the Pledge of Allegiance, Chaplain Terry Schrick led us in the 

In fact, we’re poised to keep this one going on the west coast, and perhaps one in parallel on the east coast, or perhaps regional dinners/ auctions. Dozens of veterans and their families, including two that brought their small children got to enjoy their special day—Veterans Day—to wine and dine, network, learn about Operation Code and how far we’ve come, hear personal stories from our members, including Iraq-war Marine veteran Victor Molina and how we have forever changed his life. For those that didn’t hear his story, Victor at one point worked 12-hour days digging ditches and pouring concrete and lost in the VA shuffle became the centerpiece of our existence. Victor went onto a Washington State .NET code school, doubled his income, payed off almost all his debt, and this year bought a home. 

Strengthening how we spend, raise and plan our fundraising & finance efforts, we added two professionals onto the leadership team, including, entrepreneur Dr. Stacy Chin to the board of directors and fundraising chair. Stacy leads a team of over two dozens volunteer fundraisers leveraging Slack to coordinate, integrate and synchronize our fundraising efforts. 

This year our previous CTO and Marine veteran, Rick Rein led the charge and helped migrate operationcode.org from it’s previous Ruby on Rails application towards a new shiny application integrating React for the frontend, and Rails for the backend. Behind the scenes, our frontend and backend

